---
title: "AI Tool Demo: Canva’s Text-to-Image Generator"
date: 2025-01-27
source: https://www.edutopia.org/video/ai-tool-demo-canvas-text-to-image-generator
youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_bLBMnmllJ8
---

# AI Tool Demo: Canva’s Text-to-Image Generator

> Assistant editor Daniel Leonard shows how teachers are using Canva’s AI image generator to create writing prompts and "historical" images.

**Source:** [https://www.edutopia.org/video/ai-tool-demo-canvas-text-to-image-generator](https://www.edutopia.org/video/ai-tool-demo-canvas-text-to-image-generator)
**YouTube:** [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_bLBMnmllJ8](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_bLBMnmllJ8)

## Article

Canva has become an extremely popular tool among educators in recent years. Because Canva is a design platform that offers a wide range of photo- and text-editing tools, as well as thousands of templates, many teachers are turning to it to create presentations, handouts, posters, and other visually engaging resources. The recent Edutopia article “ Supercharge Your Canva Projects ” explores the many ways the tool can be applied for the classroom.

A more recent addition to the feature set—which many users of the platform may have overlooked—is Canva’s artificial intelligence (AI)–powered image generator called Magic Media . With the free tool, users can type in a short prompt, choose an image style (like “Watercolor” or “Dreamy”), and generate four different variations of an image in seconds. (If none fit the vision, making the prompt more specific may yield better results.) Teachers can use these images in an existing design such as a presentation or poster, or simply save the images directly. There are a multitude of learning applications for a tool like this, teachers say.

For example, elementary-level English teachers are projecting wacky AI-generated images on the board to inspire their students’ creative writing—prompting students to provide the backstory for the image or somehow incorporate what it depicts into a story. Meanwhile, some history teachers have found it engaging to ask the AI to produce photorealistic images of historical scenes from before the dawn of photography. While these images are interesting to look at, the AI will often get some of the details incorrect, and teachers can prompt their students to spend some time hunting for any inaccuracies or anachronisms—like a modern-looking rifle being held by an 18th-century soldier.

In this short demo, Edutopia’s assistant editor Daniel Leonard shows how to access and use Canva’s AI image generator. (Since recording, Magic Media has moved away from Canva’s homepage, but it can be found here .) To read about other creative ways teachers are leveraging AI tools in the classroom, check out Leonard’s feature for Edutopia, “ 9 Tips for Using AI for Learning (and Fun!) .”

## Transcript

Daniel : Hi everyone, my name is Daniel and I am an assistant editor at Edutopia, and I wanted to make a short video showcasing an interesting AI tool that many teachers are using in the classroom. So many of you are probably already familiar with this website, it’s Canva, but what you may not know is that if you go to this Magic Studio tab here, Canva now has built in a free AI image generator. So we’ll hit try it out, and yeah, if you type in a prompt here and you select a style, Canva will now automatically generate that image. So I’ll paste in a silly prompt I wrote earlier, “A goat eating cake while on a surfboard,” and hit photo style, a kind of photorealistic image, and let’s see what it gives us. So 10 to 15 seconds later, Canva gives us these four options, and I think they’re all right. This one’s maybe the closest, but what I don’t love is that the goat’s on the beach as opposed to in the ocean, so I can refine my prompt if I don’t love the output. I’ll make it a little more specific. “A goat eating cake while riding a surfboard,” maybe, “In the ocean.” I think that greater specificity will give the AI a better chance at giving me what I want, and I also maybe don’t love the photorealistic style. I want something a little more out there, so let’s try “Dreamy” this time, and let’s see what it gives us. So besides these two forgetting about the cake, I think these are a lot closer to what I wanted. I really like the dreamy style, so let’s say that this one here is my favorite. So what some elementary school teachers are doing are projecting these AI-generated images on the board and using them as writing prompts. For young writers who might be struggling to get their creative juices flowing, a fun image like this can be a great entry point for writing. You can ask them to write the backstory for this image. Now, of course, this tool isn’t just useful for writing prompts. History teachers are using it to generate engaging, history oriented images. For example, I wanted to know, in a photorealistic style, what it would have been like to be in the room with Thomas Jefferson while he was drafting the Declaration of Independence. And here’s what the AI thinks it would have been like. And, of course, an AI is not always going to get the historical details right, but that can be part of the fun of the in-class activity. You can ask students, based on what you’ve learned in this class or research you can do online, is this outfit correct? Is this what people would have worn at the time? The furniture? The age of Thomas Jefferson? Are these details accurate to what we know from history, or did the AI get it wrong? And that’s a great way to get students to engage in critical thinking and also to help them understand the limitations of AI as a technology. Right now, at least, it’s not always going to get those little details right. So this is a quick crash course into this tool, and hopefully it was helpful. Thank you.
