---
title: "Edutopia Sessions: Classroom Management for New Teachers"
date: 2024-09-19
source: https://www.edutopia.org/video/edutopia-sessions-classroom-management-for-new-teachers
youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mTBky3sQDH0
---

# Edutopia Sessions: Classroom Management for New Teachers

> A panel of educators share their tips on classroom management for new teachers in this recording of a live even hosted by Edutopia.

**Source:** [https://www.edutopia.org/video/edutopia-sessions-classroom-management-for-new-teachers](https://www.edutopia.org/video/edutopia-sessions-classroom-management-for-new-teachers)
**YouTube:** [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mTBky3sQDH0](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mTBky3sQDH0)

## Article

Classroom management can look easy from the outside, but there’s a lot that’s invisible until you know what to look for, which can be challenging for new teachers. To help them, Edutopia enlisted the aid of three educators to shed light on those hidden aspects and specifically address classroom management for new teachers. Additionally, the panelists compiled some resources they thought would be helpful.

Download the PDF here —it includes essential topics like how to be a warm demander , understanding the zone of proximal development , and much more. Edutopia also published a comprehensive resource: A Starter Pack of Resources for New Teachers . The pack includes advice from longtime educators about classroom design, building community, assessment, tech, working with families, professional learning, and much more.

You don’t have to read everything right away. It’s a great page to bookmark and revisit when you need advice or new ideas. Thank you to everyone who attended the session on classroom management for new teachers.

We’re especially grateful to the panelists. Laura Thomas is a former teacher and librarian, and she is currently core faculty at Antioch University New England. Laura is also an author, as well as a key member of Edutopia’s editorial and community teams.

Jay Schauer is an educator of over 40 years focusing on science and math. Jay recently retired as the new teacher mentor for his district, and he writes on a range of topics for Edutopia. Audra Lynam is entering her third year in education.

She shares her experiences on Edutopia as a new teacher, focusing on solutions to common problems. A session on the topic of assessment for new teachers is coming soon. Stay tuned to our social media for the announcement, and we’ll post a link to the recording here.

If you have questions, please feel free to ask in the comments—our team of community facilitators is ready to support you.

## Transcript

Madison: Hello everyone and welcome to this Edutopia session. Tonight we’re going to be talking about classroom management for new teachers. My name is Madison. I live in Idaho and I’m on the community team here at Edutopia. Before we get things rolling, I just have a few housekeeping notes. First things, we are recording this event and we will make that recording available to you later. This is a webinar format, so mics are muted and cameras are off, but we encourage you to keep engaging in the chat. We encourage you to ask questions or seek clarity all throughout the session. There are several members of the Edutopia team who are on deck to answer those questions. The best way to submit those is using the Q&A feature. That way, all the questions and answers are all in the same place for everyone to see. There will also be a Q&A portion at the end of the session. I mentioned the folks that will be answering your questions, and I’d just like to introduce them now. Big thanks for our friends behind the scenes, Alicia, John, and Laura, who are educators and Edutopia facilitators, as well as Samar and Hannah from our community team. In the chat tonight are Alex and Katie, who are both educators and Edutopia facilitators. Just to tell you a little bit more about Edutopia, Edutopia is a nonprofit organization. It is a part of the George Lucas Educational Foundation, which was founded in 1991 by George Lucas, the award-winning filmmaker. Edutopia’s mission is to shine a spotlight on what works in education. We want to help educators elevate the strategies that work for them and then spread the word so that other educators can benefit from them. That is really what we’re here to do tonight. So classroom management is one of those things that can look really easy on the outside, but there’s a lot that’s invisible until you know what to look for. So tonight we have three educators here with us to make it not invisible. Laura is a former teacher and librarian, and she is currently core faculty at Antioch University. Laura is also an author as well as a key member of Edutopia’s editorial and community teams. Jay is an educator of over 40 years focusing on science and math. Jay recently retired as a new-teacher mentor for his district, and he writes on a range of topics for Edutopia. Audra is entering her third year in education. She shares her experiences on Edutopia as a new teacher, focusing on solutions to common problems. So thank you all for joining us to talk about classroom management. As an added bonus, our panelists have put together some additional resources that they thought would be helpful for you. So we will be sending those out to you later. Now Laura will take it away.

Laura: Thank you, Madison. Hi everyone. It’s great to have you here with us today. Before we get started, just to frame up our conversation a little, I want to remind those of you in the audience that as teachers, you spend a lot of time thinking about your students, about what they need, about what they know, what they still need to know, how you can meet their needs. It can feel really hard to do that when things aren’t going as well as you would like. We got into this gig because we wanted to help our students learn, but sometimes it feels like we can’t get to the content the way we’d like to because behaviors aren’t going the way we anticipated. When we were getting ready to do this, classroom management seemed probably not simple, but maybe a little simpler. Now that you’re in the thick of it, it can be really overwhelming. The gap between what we think our classrooms should look like and what they actually look like can, well, it can be really big. That doesn’t feel great because we think we should know what to do, right? We’re teachers: We should know what to do. So before we start, I just want to say, honestly, that is not true. You shouldn’t know what to do. We can’t possibly always know what to do, because our classrooms are made up of human beings, and human beings, including us, have this annoying habit of constantly changing. We learn stuff, we change, we learn new stuff, we change some more. And as teachers, we’re students too. We’re students of our students every single day of our careers. Honestly, I’d say the teacher is the most important student in the room. So ask yourself those questions: What do you need? What do you know? What do you still need to learn? How can you meet your needs? What you know and what you don’t know yet, what you need, what you’re comfortable with, all of those things matter in this conversation. When you were in your prep program, you probably learned about the zone of proximal development, you know, those zones of comfort, risk, and danger. The comfort zone was that space where you were comfortable, but it was probably a little boring after a while. Then that second zone was engaging and exciting and just challenging enough to be interesting. That last one, that outer circle, that’s where there be dragons. When you’re out there, you are terrified. Your brain is in fight or flight. You’re focused on surviving. You’re not able to learn because the part of your brain that does that work doesn’t work very well when your amygdala, where fight or flight lives, is in charge. And one of the best ways that we can calm those anxious brains is to apply something that I call the best formula ever. There’s more information in the additional resources, but the short version is that the more structure and predictability we can provide, and the stronger our relationships and the safer we feel in our community, the less likely we are to have that fight or flight response in ourself and in our students. So in our conversation today, you’re going to hear a lot of really interesting, awesome ideas. I want you to remember that while they are interesting and awesome, they’re somebody else’s ideas. Some of them may be a great fit for you right now and for your students right now, and some of them may not be for right now or maybe forever. So as you’re trying to figure out what to use now, what to hold onto for later in the year, what to put on a shelf for someday, I just want to encourage yourself to give yourself all kinds of grace. Give yourself permission to say, “Yep, that is something I could work with.” Also, “No, thanks.” There is no shame in not having all the answers. There’s no shame in not knowing what to do. So as you’re thinking about all of this content tonight, think about your zone of proximal development, just like you think of the zones for your student. If you’re not feeling good about a strategy that you’re trying, it won’t work as well. It may not work at all. You wouldn’t ask your students to operate in that danger zone. So don’t do it to yourself. You count. Remember, you are the most important student in your room. Be sweet to yourself. Honor your own zone of proximal development, please. So, anyway, that’s enough for me, at least for now. So I want to get to our panelists, Jay and Audra, who have so kindly agreed to be with us here tonight. Thank you both. Just to begin our first question, we throw the phrase “classroom management” around a lot. It’s one of those phrases that after a while, I think it becomes imbued with a lot of stuff. So when you think about it, what does it mean for you? Has or how has that meaning changed for you from when you first started to today?

Audra: I’ll go first as a new teacher. So this might be a little relatable. I first thought when I entered the classroom that I could control everyone and that all I needed was to be the best teacher in the world and my kids would behave. I think that my philosophy of classroom management has gone towards more of a guidance and coaching where you can make the choice to be coached in the classroom or you can make a decision to step out. I think by accepting kids at that zone of proximal development with their needs, I can better guide them. And I feel less frustration because I know I can’t control them. So if they aren’t responding or shutting down, they’re making their own choices as well.

Laura: Thank you. Jay, do you have anything to add?

Jay: Yeah, I would say way, way back in the early part of my career, it was like, “Oh, classroom management, that’s all about behavior.” And more and more, both in my own practice and then mentoring more recently, is more like, “OK, this is all about orchestration.” And so much—and I think Laura touched on this—so much of what we end up having to deal with, depending on the stage of our career, is how we manage instructional practices, and orchestration of those instructional practices and clarity for students really takes care of a lot of the things that we might originally be thinking about “Oh, well, that’s a management problem, that’s a management—the kids aren’t doing this or the kids are doing that when we don’t want them to.” So what I’ve seen in the last few years where I was mentoring and being in lots of different classrooms, just how much attention was paid to what your instructional practices were, and your clarity and helping ease those anxious brains took care of a lot of the things that would be like, “Oh, I have classroom management issues.” It’s like, “No, you really don’t.” It’s just tweak these few instructional things, and that takes care of a lot of the things that are causing you and your own students some challenges for the learning environment you want.

Laura: Yeah, it’s really interesting because we talk about all of these things like classroom management and pedagogy and assessment, and they’re all separate things, but in reality, they’re all just part of the same system, right? And I think maybe it’s because that’s the way we learned it in teacher school. You had a class in this and a class in that, but then once you get in the classroom and it all has to fit together, it’s a lot messier, I think, than we expected. So, I mean, I think for me, that’s why I think classroom management is particularly tricky for new teachers because there’s sort of a—I don’t know, there’s a clarity that seems to emerge when we’re an undergrad, and then once you’re in it—or when you’re in your prep program, whatever that is—and then once you’re in it and you have all of these people with competing priorities, it’s a lot messier than we expect. How do you think teachers can—new teachers can manage that ever-changing messiness from all the competing priorities and needs that come up in the classroom?

Jay: I’ll go first this time. I think some of it is you have to be a little bit comfortable with the messiness. And if those of you out there that are perfectionists, that’s really hard to do at times. It’s going to vary from class to class and group to group, but the aspect of that is, it comes down to your– something else Laura mentioned, building those relationships with the students right off the bat, trying to get to know them and get them to know you right off as quick as you can. But, again, getting into, is your lesson planned? Do you know what’s going to happen during the day? Is it really clear to the kids? Do you help them with the transition? So, again, I think planning, and as you do more and more sort of envisioning what’s going to happen, one of the things we saw again with the folks that I was mentoring, as you get more and more experience, you start recognizing, “Oh, this is when a pitfall is going to take place and so I have to really sculpt this a little bit more clearly.” Then others will be like– you’ll have done something for a long time and then there’ll be some new wrinkle that you realize that you have to deal with. But a lot of it really, again, comes down to the preparation of, “Am I getting to know the kids? Are they getting to know me? And are my lessons really clear as far as the sequence and scope and how they’re interacting and what I expect with them?” Laura: Audra, would you add anything?

Audra: I think Jay said it really well. I think one thing I always ask myself when I approach students and they just seem to be– I call them bananas, that seems like a non-judgmental way to call behavior– is just have realistic expectations for every student. If you have a student who’s coming from a dysfunctional household, maybe your first goal isn’t getting them to be at 80% mastery, but first to be comfortable with the expectations and behaviors in the classroom. I think when you understand what’s realistic for every student, you can feel more accomplished throughout your day. I think also, while I say that, I’m nervous too, because you don’t want to stop holding them to high expectations, because that’s not fair. I guess mercy is the word that comes to mind. Yeah, I hope that helps.

Laura: Yeah, it’s hard, right? Because on the one hand, you’re trying to build relationships and you’re trying to– engagement, and it feels like you’re trying to do all things. It’s still– it just isn’t quite coming together. There are these sticky wickets, right? These things– and I say sticky wicket really underplays how disruptive they can be, because they can be things like cell phones or students who– especially the lower grades, kids who just blurt out all the time, kids who just refuse to engage. So when you have something like that, and you can pick one– like, what is the stickiest wicket in your classroom right now and how are you working with it? I’m not going to pretend that you’ve solved it, but how are you working with– trying to work with the sticky wicket that you’re currently dealing with? Audra, do you feel– <overlapping conversation> Audra: Yeah, I actually, I’m going to be incredibly vague, of course. I have a student, they speak a different language than I do. They feel this linguistic resistance to learning English. So language acquisition has been difficult. They also show this kind of resistance by inappropriate behavior and offensive behavior. The student is– I really like the student. They have their bananas days and their good days. I would say the best thing I can do for them is be consistent with my punishments. I try to be fair. In some senses, there is a language barrier, but in other senses, we can expect a universal “We shouldn’t throw things.” So holding them fair to that standard, and then also allowing the other students in the room to feel safe. So that might be asking the other student to leave the classroom and talk with admin.

Laura: Thanks, thanks. Jay, what about you? I’m sure you’ve seen some sticky wickets in here.

Jay: Yeah, so, well, one thing I’d add on to Audra’s is just that aspect of being consistent. One of the things in dealing with any particular student, all the rest of the students are aware and are watching as well. So if you were completely inconsistent from student to student, then that becomes the tone of your classroom. So that consistency– and actually that was one of the things– so before the session, I reached out to some of the folks I had mentored the last few years and asked, “What advice would you give? What were some of the most important things?” Consistency was certainly one of those. Another one that I think ties into sometimes these unexpected sticky wickets or things that would pop up in one class that you know you’re going to see later in the day in another class is that aspect of modeling where you can say, “All right, here’s what happens sometimes, let’s model how it should go.” So that’s another piece that some of my folks mentioned was just– don’t assume anything, don’t assume that they know what they should do or what should happen in a given situation. Then a lot of times as a new teacher, you have the opportunity– or a veteran teacher– you have the opportunity to head that off by modeling like, “Okay, sometimes I know this happens when we do this, what do you think we should do instead?” Then you’re getting them thinking about it and being active listeners and engaged in it rather than waiting for you to tell them what they’re going to do and now they’re thinking about what they should do and why they should do it that way and not some other way.

Laura: Yeah, yeah, and there’s definitely a way that when you can engage students in creating culture, solving problems together, then it becomes all of us against the problem as opposed to student versus student, teacher versus student versus teacher. Because if we’re all trying to work together to figure out how to solve the cell phone problem or the– I mean, I live in New England, so for us in the winter, it’s so many snow boots, so many snowy mittens; how are we going to deal with all of this snow that’s inside our classroom? But if we’re all engaged in solving that problem together, then that’s different. There’s also, I think, a way that this requires– it isn’t binary. It isn’t like when you build a relationship on day one and day two, everybody’s solving problems together, right? It’s like it takes– you have to get to know each other and you have to build trust and you have to first learn how to cooperate, which is really just agreeing to not get in each other’s way and then to collaborate. That takes time and it takes real work, especially, I think, kids who don’t necessarily trust the school, don’t trust– haven’t had great experiences in classrooms or don’t feel like school is really for them, there’s this sense of “Okay, we’re going to hit this wall over and over again with this,” whatever the sticky wicket is, and “I’m not going to change my expectations for us as a class and I’m not going to stop addressing it. And yeah, we may be talking about this on the first and last day of school, but I think that this is important enough that it matters.” With each of those repetitions, I think we build some credibility. I also think it’s particularly hard for new teachers, especially– not even if they’re– they may be experienced teachers, but new in a building because you don’t have a reputation yet, right? So once kids know what to expect from you because they’ve heard from their classmates or they’ve heard from older sibs or older friends, then you start a little bit farther down the road for better or worse. So leaning into that a little bit, I think can be helpful, like finding out like what do people– what do students expect from your class when they come in? That’s– I always thought that was really enlightening when I taught high school because yeah, their perception of my class and my perception were also often very different. So when we’re talking about perceptions of classes and what it is that teachers are– new teachers particularly, but any teachers are doing when it comes to classroom management, we have very different contexts, right? I’m sure even in our webinar tonight, we have folks who teach in classrooms that have 40 kids to a class or some that have three kids to a class. We have kids who are in classrooms where kids are very transient, you know, so you see a kid for a year and never again, or you see them at the beginning of the year and the end of the year, teachers who are very rural, very urban, in between single grade versus multi-age, like we got, I’m sure we have the full spectrum. So when you think about– I’ll talk specifically about just this one scenario, the difference between a really small or a really big classroom. So if you’ve got a whole, but you got way more kids than fit in your room. Let’s start with that one. How do you approach classroom management when you are so, for lack of a better word, outnumbered by the kiddos in your space? How do you start with that? What do you do with that when you just have too many students? Because I know that’s something I’ve heard our community talk about a lot.

Audra: I’ll start. I’ll try to think of some hands-on tips. Immediately, you try to set– I know this is not trying to be cynical. You immediately let them know that you are going to follow through with what you say you’re going to follow through at. That doesn’t mean you have to be hurtful or scare the kids. It’s just– if it means that you have to go to the hallway and talk to me, if you do something inappropriate, whatever discipline strategy you’ve met, you’ve got to follow through. It’ll be hard the first week, but after the kids get used to the routine and structure, that’s when maybe you can start being a little bit more flexible if you feel like that’s needed. Then another thing with a big class is finding a way to channel that social energy. The more people you’re around, the more you want to talk. So usually in bigger classes, I make sure to build in a lot more think-pair shares and a lot more collaborative activities. That way there’s a constructive outlet for that social vibe.

Laura: Thanks. Jay, would you add anything there?

Jay: Yeah, I had some really huge classes at times over my career. One of the things– and again, this is something Audra talked about, getting some routine. So for me, a lot of times, and what I saw other people successful with is they’re assigned seats from the get-go, and especially when it’s a really crowded situation and then it starts getting really awkward to move, both where kids are and how the furniture’s set up has an opportunity to really dampen the problems that happen when you have people just trying to crowd into spaces. Then as far as getting them working together, one of the things rather than, “Okay, I’ve got a class of 40 students,” it’s like, “I’ve got a class of 10 groups of four.” So now we’re going to work with 10 groups of four instead of 40 individuals. And I would try to be pretty strategic about how I would set up those groups right off the bat. Then it’s kind of a matter of fact. It’s like, “Nope, this is how we start off,” and we’ll change that around at some point. And what they’re doing is they come into class, too– so this is one of the things I see both with veteran teachers, but especially with lots of new teachers, not having a way that you start class. So it’s a trickle in, people are doing all kinds of things. Most of my experience was high school or some middle school and it’s like, “Okay, you’re coming in from 10 different classes doing 10 different things and we all need to get you ready for this.” So one of the suggestions that big class or small class is like, “All right, here’s how you come in, here’s where you go, here’s what you do to start, and then we’re all rolling.” Laura: Yeah, that predictability, especially middle and high school kids will complain about it. They’ll make you feel like you’re not a cool teacher because– which I think for beginning teachers, especially you want the kids to like you. And that’s hard. Like I remember those days being like, “Well, I want them, but I also want to–” But, in reality, that structure allows the amygdala to relax a little. One of the things, there’s this interesting study, and I would love to find the citation if I could ever put my hands on it again, about when they have fences on playgrounds, kids play all the way to the fence. If there’s no boundary on the playground, kids play in the middle. So when you think about that in terms of– and when they’re all crowded together in the middle, you’re more likely to have issues, right? There’s more likely to be problems. So by providing those boundaries, those social boundaries, this is where you say, “I will assign your seat. We may change it up later, but for right now, this is how it is.” Then kids don’t have to figure out like, well, if I sit there, is she going to say I can’t sit there? Is somebody– that’s– who do I sit with? Is this going to be safe? Are people saving seats? If it changes from day to day, then it’s even worse. So, yeah, having those assigned seats, even though they’ll complain about it, they complain about a lot of things that are good for them. I think it’s really important to reinforce, especially for new younger teachers, it’s okay for them to complain about some stuff if you’re doing it for a reason that you know is to keep them safe and to keep the classroom, to be a really good, safe place for them. I want to go back to the sticky wicket thing again, because we have a question actually from the folks in the audience. How do you choose which sticky wicket to focus on when there’s more than one? We have the normal blurting out inappropriate noises, chewing paper and erasers and spitting at others, as well as kicking and hitting. When the more serious hands-on behaviors– activities– are addressed, then the other behaviors explode. So how do you juggle that? How do you manage all of that? How do you decide what to put first or triage?

Audra: Jay, is it okay if I go first?

Jay: Mm-hm.

Audra: So I actually just had a situation like that today. I was in my last block and I was like, “Ruh-roh.” We got too much energy, we’re being goofy. I had multiple students who were hyping each other up. I think what helped me break down kind of the complex system of chaos was understanding which person was choosing to dysregulate and which students were engaging, but trying to regulate. So I found the student who was dysregulating all of the other students. I asked him to make better choices and followed my disciplinary plan. Once I did that, it did take a second for all the other students to realize, “Ruh-roh. We can get in trouble, too,” but they were able to regulate because they honestly did want to learn today. Sorry, my cat just bit me.

Laura: Jay, do you have anything to add while Audra deals with her– <overlapping conversation> Jay: Sure, I think for one thing, especially since this is focusing especially on newer teachers, is if you haven’t already, try to get an idea of what your school’s approaches are for these things. If you’re a grade-level team or your department, it’s like, what is the practice in our building or happening next door or with our support specialists, so that you have some idea of like, okay, if this is happening, go right to this person because sometimes there are those supports. I know sometimes there aren’t and it’s like, “No, it’s all on me and I just have to do it.” I think one of the things that kind of Laura mentioned, if it’s something that’s putting people at risk, that is something that you have to, so whether it’s the student or the students around them, that’s something that you have to deal with. Again, finding the protocols of what’s going to be supported in your building is like, “Yes,” “no,” “we just ask them to step out of the room for the time being,” or you’re sending an email or a text or whatever it happens to be to deal with that. But again, some of that is modeling early on. “If something happens, here’s what I’m going to ask the rest of you to do,” and so you hopefully have enough people that are on board with doing that in some cases will hold each other accountable. But, generally, it’s like, “Okay, what is the most priority thing that you can deal with?” Then the other one, I think, again, this is new or veteran teachers, is some of those little things that you’ve been kind of putting off dealing with, it’s like that you probably should have dealt with, this is why you want to try to deal with those while they’re pretty small still. So what I saw with a lot of the newer teachers I was mentoring was they were really, really reluctant to bring in any other level of support, and especially parents. It’s like, “I keep having this problem, I keep having this problem,” and it’s like, “well, what’s the next step that you’ve taken?” And “I haven’t.” In some cases that doesn’t solve the problem, but oftentimes you’d have somebody that’s like, “I’ve got seven or eight kids out of a class of 32 that I’m having a little bit of trouble with, and an email home to those seven or eight took care of five or six of them. Okay, now I can focus on the two– and oh, those students are having problems in all their other classes, too.” That’s a much more different approach.

Laura: You know, that raises a really good point that I think there are a lot of times when teachers, especially newer teachers or teachers who are newer to their schools, when things aren’t going the way they imagine they should be, there’s a sense to sort of “Close the door, keep your eyes down, don’t let anybody see,” right? There’s a, it’s almost like a shame response because– and they don’t want anybody else to know. But in reality, we know, right, that you do better when you deprivatize your practice, right? The more you ask for help, the more you connect with folks, the more you’re going to find good resources that work for the students that you’re working with now, because other people are working with these students too. Other people in your building are working with them or worked with them last year or the year before. So when you’re thinking about like the community of support that a new teacher would have around classroom management, how would you suggest that people make that first reach out? How do you go to another teacher when you’re feeling a little like, I’m afraid that if anybody finds out how badly it’s going, I’m going to get fired. How do you help them figure out who to go to get the support that they need to solve some of their problems or to help resolve some of the sticky wickets? Audra, go ahead.

Audra: I hate to take the first again. It’s just I’m so fresh with this experience. I usually try to find another teacher who I think shares my philosophies. So a teacher who might be able to put themselves in my headspace or I could put themselves in their headspace. I usually– I want to also check my biases. So I just say, “Hey, can you tell me a little bit about how the student behaves in your class?” or maybe tell them the objective situation? Just because sometimes we do have biases, especially if you have a sticky wicket that’s coming in every day. You’re a person, so you might have some hard feelings, but being able to then establish whether or not it is kind of a situation where maybe you need to check yourself and then going back, and if you do need to address student behavior, hopefully I aim for that teacher who’s like you to have a little bit more experience or just share a time where they did that as well, just letting them know that you’re just willing to be coached.

Laura: Yeah. Yeah, and I appreciate you mentioning the implicit bias piece, because there is this, everybody comes into school with an internal idea of what makes a good student, what makes a good teacher, what makes a good family. That’s totally informed by how we grew up. It’s all based on our own experiences. And if we don’t take some time to unpack that well, why do I think a good family is this or a good student is this? What are the other ways that a family, a student, a school can be good? It can help you sort of surface some places that maybe you’re having responses you don’t really mean to be having, but it’s a cultural difference. It’s something that you’ve never had the opportunity to explore. So that’s always a good idea. So thank you for mentioning that, Audra. Jay, what would you add?

Jay: So I’d reinforce one of the things that Audra mentioned. If you haven’t already as newer teachers in the building, go find your Marigolds. So if you aren’t familiar with the Marigold concept, cult of pedagogy, find the Marigold article, read that, it’ll totally make sense. But there’s way more people out there that are veteran teachers that are really willing to help because they know what you’ve been through. And I have a lot of people, “I don’t want to be a bothered with them. I don’t want to add any additional–” a lot of them are willing to help. And you’ll quickly find out those that aren’t. Basically you’ll get the body language of “Don’t bother me, go figure it out on your own.” But one of the things, there’s just so many different things that can be going on with your students that reaching out to their collection of teachers. Especially early on, “I’m seeing this, are any of you– any others of you seeing this?” or “how is so-and-so in your classroom?” What you might find is like, oh, it’s only this class because they have a bad experience of that particular subject, or they’ve been told forever that they’re not good in math and so they’re never going to be good in your class. Or it might be something where it’s like, “Oh, well, this person’s medicine doesn’t really kick in until second period,” and so you just kind of have to tough through it on first period. So there’s so many things that could be going on that it is worth reaching out to them or reaching out to the counselor is like, “Is there any information that I should be aware of?” And you might find something that’s like, “Oh, okay, well, this is a dramatic improvement on what the student was doing just last year.” So but I do– I know from working with teachers that are brand new to the classroom, you want to do it on your own. You don’t want to feel be a burden to somebody else. And it’s like, nope, you kind of really need to do that for yourself and for your students.

Laura: Yeah, yeah, you really do. Just to remind people that as Audra or Jay, I don’t know who mentioned already, but parents can also be essential collaborators that– and I’m not– I don’t mean parents, I mean, home grownups. So whoever are the grownups that this person goes home to at night, that is, those people, most of the time, 99.9% of the time, they want those kids to do well. A lot of times the assumptions that teachers make about, well, the family doesn’t care about education. Well, what evidence do you have for that? “Well, they don’t come to back-to-school night.” Well, also, do you know about their job situation, their transportation situation? You can’t possibly know every detail of their life. Assume that they are interested, reach out, find out. Don’t assume, because from my own experience as a beginning educator, when I assumed that most of the students in my class had families that weren’t engaged, the first time I made a phone call home and the kid came in the next day and was a very, very different young man, I thought, “Oh, wow, I am so wrong about so many things.” I mean, I knew I was already wrong about a lot, but that was a big wake-up call for me back in the Dark Ages. So when you’re thinking about– we’ve talked a lot about connecting with folks who have previous experience with the kid or who’ve taught them before or the counselor. What about kids? This is actually a question that’s coming from the group. Kids who come in at different times of the school year, so they’re unknown to you, unknown to anybody in the school, and they come with really heavy behaviors is how it’s written in the question. How do you work with that? New kid, unknown family, unknown kid, lots of stuff that the kid is bringing in with them in terms of behaviors. How do you manage that?

Audra: I’ll go first. So this has happened to me a few times. I guess the first thing that I would do from an academic standpoint is get a diagnostic. Then I would see if I could talk with them one-on-one about their diagnostic. This would help with me understanding them as a person, understanding a little bit of their personalities, and then seeing how truthful that diagnostic was, or if they just didn’t feel like taking a test that day. After I do that, if I found they had behavioral issues, I might reach out to some of my resources in my school. For an example, that would be our guidance counselor, because somebody said this in the chat. They said, “Not problem children; children with problems.” I would also try to be mindful about trauma-informed care in the classroom when I interact with them, just until I know a little bit more. Well, I’ll always be trauma-informed care, but just be a little bit more sensitive. But stay fair and consistent with the boundaries, though, because if you let it slip first time, good luck getting it second and third time.

Laura: Jay, what would you add?

Jay: I would say some of the same thing as far as trying to get information from the counselors and reaching out to home to try to find out, okay, what worked with this person at the previous school? In some cases, you can actually like, “Oh, well, so-and-so at such and such a place–” and you can just email them and find out, okay, I’ve had this person; what’s worked? The other is, again, building that community in your classroom and knowing which of your students– not burdening a student with like, “Okay, I really need you to keep an eye on this person,” but having students that they just– they are natural helpers, and yep, they’re perfectly happy to incorporate somebody and try to support them as well. Especially if it’s a student that’s got behavior problems that are challenges. In a new setting, those are just going to be exacerbated. So sometimes that’s one of the pieces that can help.

Laura: Yeah, so we’re almost out of time, but I have two more questions that I’m going to try to squeeze in before we’re done. The first is, you’ve mentioned disciplinary plans a couple of times, and there’ve been a couple of questions I’ve noticed about what do you mean by disciplinary plan? What’s effective in a discipline? What does that mean?

Audra: So I have it in, I think, one of my articles about my second year, and I have a school discipline plan. So it’s basically– outlines what the school expects me to enforce. Then I have my own personal discipline plan. My school does not control how we discipline the classroom, it’s up to us. And I do have a written-out plan. So it’s first offense, verbal warning; second offense, go talk to the hallway; third offense, go to the office. This is something my admin supports, but when you create– it’s effective because that’s how my school operates and it’s something I consistently use. However, when you’re creating a discipline plan, I would really recommend talking to your admin or your counselor, whoever handles its disciplinary actions to make sure it’s suitable for your class, for your school’s culture.

Laura: Yeah, yeah, that’s great, thank you. Jay, what would you add?

Jay: Yeah, I’d say knowing what your supports are going to be, and you can, again, get that from admin, you can get that from colleagues. It’s like, “These are the typical steps that we take in this school or in this department,” or whatever it happens to be. And then the other part, again, it comes back to being clear– providing clarity and reinforcing. So it’s not just the first day of class that we’re going to go over these things. We’re going to just do some reminders, especially if things start ebbing back to like, “Okay, this is kind of drifting about some of the challenges that we have to do.” The other thing, and I think this was in one of Audra’s articles, and I’ve seen in others, where sometimes it’s like, if you’re not prepared for what’s going to happen, or you just don’t know how you want to handle it, having some scripts that you’ve written in advance, so you’re not trying to think right off the cuff, how you’re going to say something to redirect something, especially, it’s like, “That may be okay at home or wherever, it’s just not appropriate in this classroom.” So some pat phrases that you can use that sort of reset the tone.

Laura: Do you have some examples? I’m sure people are going to say, “Oh, that’s interesting. What are some examples?” Jay: Well, I’m a little out of practice. So I’m trying to think of something.

Laura: On the spot.

Jay: Oh, no, that’s okay. Yeah, I’m a little stuck. If I can come up with something, I’ll bring it back.

Laura: Well, I’ll share one that I used in the library when I was working with my younger library kids. When they would come in and– some days they would come in and they’d be dragging. They were really tired. Some days they’d come in and it was just like– it was a bag of kittens. They were just so much energy. We would talk about silly bodies. What are these silly bodies doing? These silly bodies are all over the place. How can we calm down our silly bodies? Then we would talk about, we’d start at the top. So “Silly bodies, what can we do? Put your hands on your head to calm your silly hands down and then on your shoulders.” So it was a routine that I would use just to manage the younger kids. When they were having those– they were like zoomies. If you’ve had a dog that’s had the zoomies, it was like that. So that was sort of– and I used it over and over and over again to the point that I only had to say the phrase “silly bodies” and the kids would immediately start to sort of come back into themselves a little, which was really helpful after a little while. So that’s an example. Maybe it’ll trigger some for you as well. Let’s see. Well, we are literally just about done. So, okay, I’m going to actually try to squeeze one more in. If you– and Jay, this is a little more for you, I think, just because it’s older-kid oriented. When you have, especially senior level kids, like juniors and seniors, even younger high school kids sometimes, they come in and they just want to get the credit and get out. They don’t want to engage. You come up with cool projects, cool things you want to do, and they– either they’re too cool for it, or maybe it feels too risky; like it’s in their zone of danger. So that’s a little different, but sometimes they just want to get the credit and they don’t want to get an A, they just need a C or a D to get out the door. And that’s all they’re going to get. So they’re not necessarily participatory engaged. Sometimes that along with that, you get some behaviors. So how do you deal– how do you advise your teachers, your high school teachers to deal with those situations?

Jay: So to some extent, you do have to meet those kids where they are. In some cases it’s finding out a little more about what their path is that got them there. Especially in a traditional high school setting, we have a lot of schools– our schools are really a lot of college prep and not so many other things. It’s like, “This isn’t for me, I’m not going to use it as we go on.” Yes, you can talk about “These skills will pay off,” and all these other things, but one of the other pieces in there, and I think this ties into lots of other things. I know we’ve talked about this in some of our meetings is finding opportunities for student choice about what they can do with some of these tasks that you’re looking for. So you may have some kind of project that you have several different options for, and then you provide an option that, okay, come up with a different way that you want to present it to yourself or for yourself. And that’s something where in some cases, students have the chance to actually have a little more ownership, actually have a chance to have a little more direction that they can choose and that you might get a bit more out of them that way.

Laura: Okay, that’s great. That’s great. Thank you. I’m looking at the questions now from the webinar audience to see– oh, this is interesting. So a question related to what Jay shared about instructional clarity. “I substitute teach in K to third grade,” and we haven’t talked hardly at all about substitute teaching and, man, those people– treasures in heaven. That’s all I have to say about substitute teachers. So this person is looking for language that’s clear and direct, that will improve in the lessons as well as the overall instruction, because you mentioned at the beginning that clear instructional language can help with classroom management. So are there specific ideas there that come to mind for you specific– or maybe even just resources that you could point this person towards?

Jay: Well, I’d say one of the biggest practices that I’ve seen people make big leaps with success with students is oftentimes we’re giving verbal directions only, and students just get lost. It’s like I give them five steps of instruction and they can remember the first and maybe the second. And then that’s when things start going off the rails. So anytime you’re doing for a first year teacher, new teacher and veteran teachers and a substitute teacher, when I’m providing instruction and I’m providing things to try to keep that clarity, giving them, “Here’s whether I have it on the board as I’m going over it, they have it in paper as they’re working on it”, but then also before you’ve even started having them go through it with you so that they’re actually running through their heads about this is what I’m going to do next. This is going to be the first step. Okay, table three, what’s the next step? Okay, table four, what’s the next step? You’re getting them engaged, but you’re also getting them to think about that process.

Laura: Yeah, yeah, sometimes in the work that I do at Antioch when we’re working with teachers around this stuff, we’ll talk about standard operating procedures, having sort of a standard sequence of things that we always do in these situations so that kids– so that they can predict what they’re supposed to do when a certain thing happens. Sometimes it’s like the processes and things that you learn, like a lot of responsive classroom stuff has this built into it in those first six weeks when you’re learning how to move from place to place and put things away and all that. But at the middle and upper grades, having those standard operating procedures around when you get an assignment, when you come into class, you’re going to do these things so that they become sort of routine. I think those can really help as well. And it’s a little harder for a sub coming in trying to do that. But if you’re a teacher who has to have a sub, because we all have to have a sub, having those in place can make it a lot easier on your sub because the kids come in and they already know what to do.

Jay: Right, and I’d say something, those kinds of things, elementary schools, their classrooms are filled with anchor charts of, “Here’s how we do writer’s workshop, here’s how we do this, here’s how we go to recess,” those kinds of things. I think there’s a lot of high school classes that could benefit from some of those things, especially when you’re gone or when a new student comes in where it’s like, “okay, everybody take a look at the chart for here’s how we start labs or here’s how we set up labs,” whatever it happens to be. I do want to mention– I don’t know where this fits in. I want to mention an Edutopia article that I found really useful and found useful for the folks that I was mentoring, and it’s a research-based one, which are some of the ones I really love because it’s “Eight Proactive Classroom Management Tips” by Yuki Terada from August 2019. So those of you that are writing things down that do that, T-E-R-A-D-A, just look up that, “Eight Proactive Classroom Management Tips”. And it was fascinating. I was writing my notes down and I was getting the emails that I was getting from my former mentees. “Yep, that’s number two on this one. Yep, that’s number seven on this one.” So great, Samar just posted the link in the chat.

Laura: Samar’s so good. So another question from the webinar audience, wondering about gamology and specifically about– and Audra, you’re going to know some stuff about this, I think you’re going to have heard some stuff about this– external rewards for behavior rather than leaning into or encouraging internal motivation. What are your thoughts about that, about gamifying and particularly around behavior?

Audra: So when I think about gamifying behavior, I’m at an older grade at 10th grade. So a lot of my kids don’t really get as thrilled with maybe a piece of candy or a desk pet like younger kids do. Although kids are naturally a little bit more competitive at this age and they also don’t want to be embarrassed. So when I think of like gamology, sometimes in a very playful sense, I’ll put them in sides and whoever gets the most, we call them aura points because of TikTok, whoever gets the most aura points wins, then they’re fighting to say the right answer in class and they’re engaging. Sometimes they’ll look at their friend and go, “Don’t do that, she’ll take away our aura point.” So it’s a fun way and it also takes away some of the moral weight of– some kids are more easily dysregulated. So being told, giving a negative moral word to that dysfunction isn’t fair sometimes. So it’s okay.

Laura: Yeah, yeah. I love that because it also– it’s a bit of a community builder as well, right? Because there are ways that when you can play together and you’re laughing and I love the aura points, like that’s brilliant because that connects to something that they enjoy with their friends, they have a positive association and it also– it gives you sort of a fun way to draw attention to, behaviors that align with expectations. Yeah, I like that, I like that. Jay, would you add anything there?

Jay: I think the one thing is that any kind of reward you’re going to have to do has to be pretty quick. So it’s like, okay, the ones that I’ve seen that haven’t worked particularly well, it’s like, if you get two weeks of gold stars in a row, then you can finally get something, because it’s just the reward is too far off in the distance for these developing brains.

Laura: Yeah, yeah. It’s funny because teenagers, especially middle schoolers, they look like adults, right? They look like grownups and it’s easy to forget that they do not have grown-up brains yet, that their prefrontal cortex has not come back online completely or, you know, very much at all. It’s still– they’re pruning all kinds of neural pathways and there’s all kinds of stuff going on in there. So even on the outside, they look like fully mature adults, inside their heads, they are not. I think that can be really hard to keep in mind as well. What about when you have a really– we talked before about large classes, right? So when you have a really big class and you’re trying to do collaborative activities, group stuff, PBL, it’s hard sometimes to manage behaviors when you’ve got kids working– like you mentioned before, Jay, you’ve got four groups of 10 or, Audrey, you mentioned as well, having kids working in groups. How do you manage behaviors when everybody’s turned in doing their work around their tables or whatever? Go ahead, Audra.

Audra: Okay, I don’t want to speak over Jay. So one thing that I do is I’m kind of the panopticon. I’m constant surveillance. If I were doing group activities, I’m kind of walking around like a hawk trying to sniff out naughty behaviors. Then another thing I do is I ask for like some kind of action representation of understanding, whether it’s a diagram, work on a whiteboard, filling out a little half sheet of paper, because then they’re accountable. When they have something that’s physically there, that’s holding them accountable for working, they’re more likely to. And then when you see a student who’s not engaging, then you can bring in your discipline. I saw somebody call it a discipline matrix. You can bring in that discipline plan or matrix and try to level with them or proceed with a disciplinary action.

Laura: That’s awesome. That’s awesome. Jay, anything to add?

Jay: I think on one of those things, when you’re doing these group things, oftentimes they’re doing a pretty large task, but you break it down into smaller tasks and you use some time. So the use of time to create some degree of urgency, I think is really valuable in students. You tend to err on like, “Okay, I think it’s going to take them 15 minutes, but I’m going to tell them they’ve got 10 minutes to do it,” so that, “okay, you guys are really working hard and it looks like– what do we need? Two, three minutes?” And you get a little more ownership on those as opposed to, “Okay, I’m going to give you 15 minutes. All right, you’re all done in eight minutes. Okay, now we’re going to do this.” “But you told us we had 15 minutes.” So those kinds of things where you create some sense of urgency. Like Audra said, you can do a quick check. It’s like, “All right, let’s see, just number of fingers, how much more time do we need?” Or you’re getting ready to move on to step two. Step two is a little bit more complex. Where is everybody on step two? And let’s get the thumbs– as far as how confident you are going. Now I can prioritize which groups I really need to get to. I’d say that’s one thing, however you do it in your classroom– especially, again, newer teachers, however you do it in your classroom, you find a way to lots of different ways that are listed out there. This, again, ties into management because if kids are lost, they’re not working, then they start doing behaviors you don’t really want them to do with this particular task. But that way you can also prioritize, rather than going in proximity, it’s like, “Okay, these first three tables that I would normally walk to actually know what they’re doing. I’m just going to waste time. I need to get to that table in the back corner because they’re the ones that are kind of stumped.” Or you do the quick check and it’s like, “Okay, all but one table knows what they need to do. I only need to go to this one table.” Or oftentimes like, “Okay, nobody knows what they need to do. I need to just kind of reset this with everybody,” so.

Laura: Yeah, and that’s a whole– I feel like managing collaborative work is a whole other webinar. So you have 30 seconds each. If you had one piece of advice around classroom management to give to a teacher and you only had 30 seconds to do it, because that’s what you got, what would it be? Audra, I want you to go first.

Audra: Oh man, I was thinking about that as you were saying it. I would say consistency, equitable– be equitable, and bring humor into it. Make it more lighthearted when it’s appropriate.

Laura: Great, thank you. That was actually less than 30 seconds. How about you?

Jay: Okay, I’m going to use one that came back from one of my folks I did a workshop with people before they started the previous year and got a quote from somebody that works in my wife’s doctor’s office: Battle your dragons while they’re small. So you can apply that to so many different things if you just kind of keep that in the back of your mind. It’s like, “Okay, these behaviors are a little bit annoying. I’m just going to ignore them.” No, battle those while they’re small because then they’re just going to get more and more annoying. Whatever the thing happens to be going on in your classroom that’s starting to go down the way that you don’t want them to, deal with it while it’s small.

Laura: Great, thank you very much. That was great advice. Madison is back, I think, to wrap things up.

Madison: Yeah, thank you so much, Jay, Audra, and Laura for joining us. That was fantastic. So let’s give them a hand. And thank you to everyone who’s joined us tonight. Thank you for all your amazing engagement in the chat. One thing I did want to mention, if you want to keep engaging us this way, we do ask a lot of community questions on edutopia.org. That is a great place to get more wisdom and resources from each other. So I really recommend checking that out. There’s also additional resources from our panelists as well as recording, which we will be sending out in an email after the event. So feel free to share it with your friends or your colleagues who may also find it helpful. Speaking of helpful, we have another resource that was designed especially for you. It’s called a starter pack of resources for new teachers. The goal of the starter pack was to collect all the things that educators wish that they had known on their first day of teaching, and it’s all here. So there is advice from new teachers to new teachers from long-time teachers. There are resources for classroom design, building community, assessment tech, working with families, professional learning, all the things. So not to be overwhelming, you don’t have to go read them all right now, but it’s a great page to go bookmark and then come back to when you need some new ideas or some advice. Then there’s just one last quick thing that I want to ask of you before we wrap up. Please share your feedback with us. There should be a link in the chat and we’ll also send the link in our follow-up email. So this is our first Edutopia session. We would really, really love to hear what you thought, which topics would be helpful for you for us to explore in the future or how we could improve the experience. So, again, thank you to our panelists. Thanks for everyone who made this event happen. And thank you to all of you for joining us tonight and for all of your amazing questions. Good night.
