---
title: "How to Get Kids Moving in Every Subject"
date: 2022-10-14
source: https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-get-kids-moving-every-subject
---

# How to Get Kids Moving in Every Subject

> Adding some movement to lessons not only engages and motivates students—research says it helps them recall and retain information. And it’s fun!

**Source:** [https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-get-kids-moving-every-subject](https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-get-kids-moving-every-subject)

## Article

To learn more about the research on movement and learning and view the sources cited in this video, please see the links below: 2022 study on embodied learning in children who move while learning sounds of letters , by Linn Damsgaard, Anne-Mette Veber Nielsen, Anne Kaer Geil, Anne Sofie Bogh Malling, Soren Kildahl Jensen, and Jacob Wienecke 2021 study on whether basketball combined with math can improve motivation , by Jacob Wienecke, Jesper Hauge, Glen Nielsen, Kristian Mouritzen, and Linn Damsgaard 2012 study on whether integrating physical activity in the elementary school classroom influences academic motivation , by Spyridoula Vazou, Panagiota Gavrilou, Evangelia Mamalaki, Anna Papanastasiou, and Nefeli Sioumala 2011 study on the effects of movement in the classroom , by Carrie Jean Braniff The Kinesthetic Classroom: Teaching and Learning Through Movement , by Traci Lengel and Mike Kuczala 2010 study on engaging students through multimodal learning environments , by Michael David Sankey and Michael Gardiner 2002 study on interest, learning, and the psychological processes that mediate their relationship , by Mary Ainley, Suzanne Hidi, and Dagmar Berndorff 1990 article on interest and its contribution as a mental resource for learning , by Suzanne Hidi

## Transcript

Narrator: Studies have shown that students can retain more information, and may have deeper engagement and motivation, when movement is integrated into learning. It helps boost students’ interest levels, which supports greater sustained attention to lessons. This allows them to learn more effectively and commit concepts to long-term memory. It contributes to their daily physical activity—and it’s fun. Information recall helps students learn to think like mathematicians. Try having kids skip-count or list multiples while doing a warm-up activity like jumping jacks or push-ups. Or, ask students to see how many baskets they can sink from 10 feet away versus 5 feet, and then compare the results. One study found that when basketball was integrated with math instead of just played after a lesson, students scored better on tests and remembered more. In science, you can have students act out any number of phenomena to help visualize and understand complex concepts. For a lesson on states of matter, ask students to act out solids, liquids, or gases. Or, try having students learn about the solar system by dancing out the movements of the planets. You’ll be surprised at how students continue to utilize the movements and reference the activity when they think of the concepts much later. Acting things out is also great for social studies—it can help students retain key concepts, names of important figures, or significant moments in history. Skits can also help students grasp the basic narrative elements of drama and role-plays. Or to help students better understand causes and effects of historical events, have them organize themselves into lines, rows, or groupings to make sense of what happened. In English language arts, students can use their body to represent key ideas, as well as to demonstrate their understanding of those ideas. When reading, students can act out vocabulary words or characters’ emotions, like jealousy, fear, love. During story time, ask younger students to stomp their feet, representing a period, every time you reach the end of a sentence. And adding movement can reinforce key early literacy skills. Try having students use whole-body movements while learning letter-sound pairings. It just might improve their ability to recognize individual letter sounds. Infusing classrooms with physical activity isn’t just good for kids’ bodies; it’s also a powerful tool for content, proficiency, and retention.
