---
title: "How Culturally Responsive Practices Help Students Connect to School"
date: 2022-09-28
source: https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-culturally-responsive-practices-help-students-connect-school
---

# How Culturally Responsive Practices Help Students Connect to School

> This bilingual elementary school offers students a more inclusive educational experience—through music and culturally relevant instruction.

**Source:** [https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-culturally-responsive-practices-help-students-connect-school](https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-culturally-responsive-practices-help-students-connect-school)

## Transcript

Todos cantando bien. Listo… [ Música ] Because of the dual language program and our implementation of the culturally responsive instruction, students know that it’s a positive environment where they’re welcomed and they’re loved, and they’re embraced for who they are. They see themselves in the texts. They see themselves in the examples. They see their names in the problems. They want to be there every day and that helps with our retention. Muy bien, muy bien. The mission of Davis Elementary is to celebrate the diversity of our students. We empower our students through bilingual and multi-cultural experiences. Our dual language model is a 90-10 model. We have kindergarten and 1st grade 90% of the day is in Spanish, 10% is in English, so that by the time you get to 5th grade then it’s a 50-50 model. Me gusta hablar el español y si yo soy bilingüe yo sé otra forma de comunicarme. Culturally responsive teaching is being able to use the cultures and the backgrounds of students to enhance their learning experiences in class. So making sure that I know who they are and where they come from and what their passions are to drive my instruction. [Inaudible] tú eres mi otro yo, si te hago daño a ti, me hago daño a mí mismo. Every morning, we recite In Lak’ech. In Lak’ech es de cultura indígena maya. In Lak’ech is an ancient saying, saying that “you are my other me.” Si te amo y te respeto a ti, me amo y me respeto a mí mismo. The more positive, kind things that I do to you is a reflection of who I am as a person. It’s not just something we repeat everyday, it’s how we deal with solving conflicts, like how can I show in Lak’ech everyday. Me gusta porque enseña a niños a respetar a otras personas. Vamos a repasar los problemas, aunque no hemos terminado, está bien, vamos a repasar las preguntas. Today we had an important lesson on metaphors and similes. It was in Spanish, but a lot of them knew metaphors in English, and they were trying to translate them. I think we got into a really deep conversation about not being able to translate certain things. That’s part of the culturally relevant aspect is when students deviate from the lesson plan but it’s beneficial for their learning and it’s a connection that they’re making and they’re passionate about, it’s definitely worthwhile. [ Música ] The diversity, the languages, that’s where our strong point here at Davis is. We use Mariachi as a tool to integrate all of the different cultures. It provides a place to be included in. And not all kids feel that. The Mariachi program is important to me because I get to learn my culture. We teach everything under the sun [laughs] from reading music, playing by ear, number systems, color coding. Then Fridays we have the performance of the classes. Que digan que estoy dormido y — They get to perform in front of a crowd so that builds their self-confidence. Es una gran gran oportunidad y mi sueño es ser muy muy fantástico con el mariachi. When I sing, Spanish just comes out of me. It makes me want to come to school because not a lot of schools have Mariachi. Sí, señor. Having solid programs or In Lak’ech or Mariachi has helped our retention because parents are now reaching out and seeking that. We’re big on community building here. You’re not just coming to school as an individual but you’re coming to school to build this community. A lot of people are concerned about test scores and so forth, and I do agree, that’s important. But it’s those day-to-day opportunities that we give our students that will give them a sense of worth of who they are and that they belong and they connect to what they’re learning. Dame posición descanso. [ Inaudible ]
