---
title: "How to Engage Introverted Learners"
date: 2025-11-12
source: https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-to-engage-introverted-learners
youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vv7RLX_5Rrc
---

# How to Engage Introverted Learners

> When students have a variety of ways to lean into discussions, both introverts and extroverts are able to express their ideas and contribute.

**Source:** [https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-to-engage-introverted-learners](https://www.edutopia.org/video/how-to-engage-introverted-learners)
**YouTube:** [https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vv7RLX_5Rrc](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Vv7RLX_5Rrc)

## Article

Western culture rewards extroverts in many situations, and despite growing knowledge of the differences between extroverts and introverts, there tends to still be misunderstanding around how introverts respond to the world around them—quietness is often mistaken for shyness or lack of interest. In the classroom in particular, active, vocal participation is often equated with being more engaged, but introverted learners may be engaging with content just as rigorously in ways that are not as obvious to teachers. High school English teacher Brett Vogelsinger has used a discussion scaffolding technique called “White Snow, Yellow Snow” to help provide a structure for sharing ideas in a way that is more predictable and friendly to both extroverted and introverted students.

Within this structure, students can raise a white card to indicate that they have a new idea, or they can raise a yellow card to revisit a previous idea. Using simple tools such as colored index cards to cue paths for speaking can help create an environment where all learners feel comfortable using their voice. Additionally, teachers can look for any opportunities to create space for writing ideas down or sharing thoughts via different mediums, like message boards or chats.

This can open up avenues for introverted learners to take part in ways that are better suited to their wiring—being able to write down thoughts before sharing aloud can make all the difference for a student who finds it difficult to just jump into an active conversation. Though introverted learners may engage in the classroom in less visible ways, discussion strategies that offer different kinds of opportunities to express ideas provide a path for more students to be seen and valued. For more ideas about how to support introverted learners in the classroom, read Katy Farber’s article for Edutopia, “ Creating Paths to Participation for Introverts ,” or Bekah Landfair’s Edutopia article, “ Introvert-Friendly Cooperative Learning .”

## Transcript

Brett Vogelsinger: As an extroverted person, early in my career, I overvalued, maybe even favored, the students that were very outgoing and fed my notion that class was going well and overlooked some of the quieter ones who may have been just as engaged but in different ways. Think about silent reading. Any human could be engaged in it in a very passive, unengaged way. But they could also be sitting there silently, incredibly engaged in the reading, having a dialogue with the author in their head, pausing, rereading, looking over things. It’s happening in silence. It’s sometimes hard to tell. That analogy helps me understand how introverted students might be engaged in a class discussion, for instance. They could really be dialoguing with the ideas in their head, processing them deeply, even if they’re not speaking up. Now, as teachers, we like to see that somehow in a way that’s visible to us, but not all engagement is immediately visible. We need to allow different sorts of opportunities for students to show that they are engaged. White Snow, Yellow Snow is a discussion strategy that allows students to communicate to the teacher when they are building on another student’s idea and when they are expressing a fresh new idea. White snow is fresh—no one’s been there before. And when we see yellow snow, we know someone’s been there before. So each student is given a white and a yellow card on their desk. And when they would like to participate and build on something they just heard, they can raise the yellow card. That tells me they want to keep going to that place that’s already been brought up. When they raise a white card, it means I have a new direction I’d like to take things. But for an introverted student, it helps them to feel confident that what they have to say connects to the stream of conversation. They’re already thinking about it and they’ve silently communicated that to the teacher by holding up the card. I think it gives them the ability to think of the conversation as a crystallizing structure that’s developing rather than a pinball game in which there’s ideas flying around the room. Anything that gives students a chance to write down some thinking before they have to speak is helpful. Make room for taking out a journal, a paper, a pencil, a pen. Make sure those little instances of writing are a regular feature of your class. We could have a message board that’s live in class and students have to respond there. And then we could put that up on the screen and be praising a student for, “Wow, I really love this idea that you put out. Can you elaborate on that a little bit?” So now, someone who felt they needed the time to process, write it down, and didn’t feel like they wanted to raise their hand in a spoken conversation, feels that their ideas are valued because they had a chance to think them through and write them first. When we recognize people have different ways of engaging and different ways of recharging their energy, that shows that we respect kids and we notice their differences. That makes it good for everyone in the whole class.
