---
title: "Pairing Teachers to Drive Professional Development"
date: 2019-03-28
source: https://www.edutopia.org/video/pairing-teachers-drive-professional-development
---

# Pairing Teachers to Drive Professional Development

> Regular peer-to-peer observations—with a focus on learning, not evaluation—fosters a culture of growth and safety for teachers.

**Source:** [https://www.edutopia.org/video/pairing-teachers-drive-professional-development](https://www.edutopia.org/video/pairing-teachers-drive-professional-development)

## Article

Teachers at this elementary school in the Bronx use a TAG feedback form tailored for professional growth to share their observations with each other. TAG stands for Tell something you like, Ask a question, and Give a suggestion. (Download a PDF of the TAG feedback form for teachers .) This video is part of our Schools That Work series and features key practices from Concourse Village Elementary School .

## Transcript

Jennifer Negrón: Okay. How many activities did you find out that she has? Ambar Quiñones: Because of the professional growth partners, it makes me see things in a different light. By sharing our practices and providing feedback to one another, every educator in our building has the capacity to become the best educator they can be. So today, I notice a lot of students working independently. I have some questions. If you notice here– The vision of our school is that all scholars can learn … does not determine your destination. Every educator sees the responsibility that they have to all students when teachers learn and grow. That benefits everyone in the building. Our Peer Inter Visitation initiative is a way to promote professional growth. So we call each other professional growth partners. And we have six weeks to go into each other’s classroom to observe and learn. Jennifer Negrón : Page 59. I mean, initially, when you get anybody in your room, you get a little nervous. But when you’re getting observed from your colleagues, I think there’s more of, like, a comfort level. And you learn best practices from one another, so you see strategies that you can then implement in your classroom that could work for your students as well. Ambar Quiñones: See, I’m going to give you the opportunity to read page 60 and annotate important information that helps us better understand Jazmin and her relationship with her family. Okay? Jennifer Negrón : So usually, what we do is we use our prep periods. Every week, I’ll go to my professional growth partner’s room for 15 minutes and then, I’ll take notes. Ambar Quiñones: It’s all objective. You’re just writing down what you see, that the students are saying and doing, and what the educator is saying and doing. And you type everything up in order to later on provide the feedback with evidence.

Alexa Sorden: When I’m thinking about how to pair teachers, I assign them based on their learning needs, strengths, and also personality. Jennifer is really great at setting up small groups. That’s a need Ambar may have. And then, I want Jennifer to see how Ambar’s annotating texts, because that’s something that’ll support her in her practice. Ambar Quiñones: So my annotations were that mom was not very loving, but also, grandma– Student: So the mom followed the grandma. Jennifer Negrón : So when I went into Ms. Quiñones’ room, I was looking to see the literacy skills and how to apply them in math. I noticed Ms. Quiñones was modeling annotations in math. When we problem solve, we also need to make annotation markings as well. Ambar Quiñones: So now, you guys are going to have a chance to read it on your own and continue annotating. So when I observe Ms. Negrón, in order to prepare to walk into her classroom and get the best out of the experience, I make sure that I check what we have spoken before. Every week, then, we build on the suggestions that we have. Jennifer Negrón : So how is your triad doing?

Student: Good. Jennifer Negrón : So you guys solved the problem already?

Student: Mm-hmm. Jennifer Negrón : Okay. Ambar Quiñones: So after the 15-minute observation every week, we sit down and debrief using the TAG form. Jennifer Negrón : TAG is– the T stands for tell something you like. I noticed that you were modeling how to annotate, and I really liked how you were, like, here’s my evidence in the text that supports this. The A is to ask a question. So maybe we didn’t understand what the kids were doing or why a certain group was given something. So we ask a question for clarity. Are the questions ever differentiated for your small group? Ambar Quiñones: Some chapters have front-loaded questions. Jennifer Negrón : The G is to give a suggestion. So what is one thing that they can work on that is attainable? And that’s actually great that you said that because one of my suggestions was maybe you can give students in your small group the question ahead of time so that they can– Ambar Quiñones: Definitely, it’s very useful, the feedback. At the end, you have that concrete next step of this is something that you can do. We always e-mail the TAG form because we want that person to have that as a reference. And we CC Ms. Sorden.

Alexa Sorden: So it allows me to be a part of the conversation, and it also allows me to provide resources to help them meet their next step. It’s about learning. It’s not about evaluation. Jennifer Negrón : It’s definitely opened my eyes to things that I don’t necessarily see when I’m in the classroom every day with kids. And it has helped me grow as a teacher. We’ve created an environment where we feel safe with each other. It’s respectful feedback. Ambar Quiñones: It’s part of our school culture. So just by opening the doors of their classroom, it’s– there’s a bigger picture to this. It’s about how you could improve teaching, which would ultimately help students learn. Bye. Jennifer Negrón : Bye. Thank you.
