---
title: "Understanding and Supporting Your Student With ADHD"
date: 2021-11-19
source: https://www.edutopia.org/video/understanding-and-supporting-your-student-adhd
---

# Understanding and Supporting Your Student With ADHD

> ADHD can be frustrating for both teachers and students, but coming together to find strategies that work helps your student—and your relationship—blossom.

**Source:** [https://www.edutopia.org/video/understanding-and-supporting-your-student-adhd](https://www.edutopia.org/video/understanding-and-supporting-your-student-adhd)

## Article

The characteristics of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), one of the most common childhood neurodevelopmental disorders, often get misinterpreted as intentional misbehavior or daydreaming in the classroom. But when teachers engage their student with ADHD in exploring what works for them, it can lead to stronger connections and more academic success. To find more strategies and resources for working with students with ADHD, or to learn more about the studies and articles cited in the video, visit the links below: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s Data and Statistics About ADHD The American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry’s ADHD and the Brain National Institute of Mental Health’s topic page on Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder T.A.

Hartanto et al.’s 2015 analysis of the impact of physical activity on ADHD Katy Reckdahl’s 2020 article for Edutopia, “ 5 Ways to Support Kids With ADHD During Remote Learning ” Ezra Werb’s 2019 article for Edutopia, “ Helping Students With ADHD Stay Organized ” Nina Parrish’s 2018 article for Edutopia, “ Setting Students With ADHD Up for Success ”

## Transcript

Any child can be inattentive, impulsive, or hyperactive at times, but a child who exhibits these behaviors frequently and severely may have attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Students with ADHD may struggle with starting and completing tasks, following multistep directions, rushed and messy work, and restlessness. It’s one of the most common childhood neurodevelopmental disorders, but not all ADHD looks the same. Some children only have difficulty with attention and organization, while others experience hyperactivity and impulsivity. And some have challenges with both sets of traits. These symptoms can be frustrating in the classroom. While it’s easy to interpret them as intentional misbehavior or daydreaming, they’re actually the result of brain chemistry that just works differently. Students with ADHD can also be some of the most creative and passionate contributors to your classroom. Reframing the way you look at your student and finding the right strategies to support them will encourage them to shine. Ask your student how they learn best. Some people are able to focus more when they’re standing or moving around. Others find fidgets like pipe cleaners, beaded bracelets, or clay to be helpful. At times, a signal like a knock on the desk can help refocus a student’s attention. Try a strategy for a few weeks and then debrief. Your student will be more invested in suggesting and trying solutions if they’re part of the discussion. A complex multistep assignment without the appropriate scaffolding can be daunting for a child with ADHD. They commonly struggle with executive function skills, like the ability to remember the sequence of steps in order to meet a goal. Start by explaining the big picture, but assign smaller work chunks—with shorter deadlines—to help students grasp the map of how to reach the end goal. Helping a student track projects and deadlines using a learning management system simplifies these tasks by having everything in one place. If you can’t go digital, showing your student how to organize themselves with tools like agendas and to-do lists can build positive habits. Breaks benefit all students, but they are crucial for those with ADHD. You can actually increase productivity by building movement into your class, especially before asking them to work quietly. Keep your movement break short and structured, like a game of Simon Says or a set of 10 jumping jacks. After periods of concentration, allow students to stretch, get some water, or talk softly with a friend. Calibrating your teaching strategies to better support a student with ADHD will not only bolster your relationship, it will likely have a lasting impact on their success.
